Fork choice upgrade (#3290)
ethereum/consensus-specs: specs/phase0/fork-choice.md

    root: Root
```

### `is_previous_epoch_justified`

```python
def is_previous_epoch_justified(store: Store) -> bool:
    current_slot = get_current_slot(store)
    current_epoch = compute_epoch_at_slot(current_slot)
    return store.justified_checkpoint.epoch + 1 == current_epoch
```

#### `Store`

> The `Store` is responsible for tracking information required for the fork choice algorithm. The important fields being tracked are described below:

Author: I meant important to describe, since the usage of these fields is not obvious otherwise.

- `justified_checkpoint`: the justified checkpoint being used as the starting point for the LMD GHOST fork choice algorithm.
- `finalized_checkpoint`: the highest finalized checkpoint that was seen. In general, the fork choice will consider only those blocks that are not conflicting with this checkpoint.
- `unrealized_justified_checkpoint` & `unrealized_finalized_checkpoint`: these track the highest justified & finalized checkpoints resp., without regard to whether on-chain ***realization***, i.e., FFG processing of new attestations, has occurred. This is an important distinction from `justified_checkpoint` & `finalized_checkpoint`, because they will only track the checkpoints that are realized on-chain. Note that on-chain processing of FFG information only happens at epoch boundaries.
- `unrealized_justifications`: stores a map of block root to the unrealized justified checkpoint observed in that block.

```python
@dataclass
class Store(object):
    time: uint64
    genesis_time: uint64
    justified_checkpoint: Checkpoint
    finalized_checkpoint: Checkpoint
    unrealized_justified_checkpoint: Checkpoint

>     unrealized_finalized_checkpoint: Checkpoint

Reviewer: nevermind you use them the same as us: you call `update_checkpoints` with the unrealized finalized during `on_tick`

    return attestation_score + proposer_score
```

#### `get_voting_source`

```python
def get_voting_source(store: Store, block_root: Root) -> Checkpoint:
    """

>     Compute the voting source checkpoint in the case that block with root ``block_root``
>     is chosen as the head block

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Compute the voting source checkpoint in event that block with root ``block_root`` is the head block
```

    """
    block = store.blocks[block_root]
    current_epoch = compute_epoch_at_slot(get_current_slot(store))
    block_epoch = compute_epoch_at_slot(block.slot)
    if current_epoch > block_epoch:

>         # The block is from a prior epoch, the voting source will be pulled-up.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        # The block is from a prior epoch, the voting source will be pulled-up
```

        return store.unrealized_justifications[block_root]
    else:

>         # The block is not from a prior epoch, therefore the voting source is
>         # not pulled up.

Reviewer 2: prefer one line and no period at end of comment
```suggestion
        # The block is not from a prior epoch, therefore the voting source is not pulled up
```

        head_state = store.block_states[block_root]
        return head_state.current_justified_checkpoint

```

#### `filter_block_tree`

> *Note*: External calls to `filter_block_tree` (i.e., any calls that are not made by the recursive logic in this function) MUST have `block_root` as `store.justified_checkpoint`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Note*: External calls to `filter_block_tree` (i.e., any calls that are not made by the recursive logic in this function) MUST set `block_root` to `store.justified_checkpoint`.
```

            return True
        return False

    current_epoch = compute_epoch_at_slot(get_current_slot(store))
    voting_source = get_voting_source(store, block_root)

    # The voting source should be at the same height as the store's justified checkpoint
    correct_justified = (
        store.justified_checkpoint.epoch == GENESIS_EPOCH
        or voting_source.epoch == store.justified_checkpoint.epoch
    )

    # If the previous epoch is justified, the block should be pulled-up. In this case, check that unrealized

>     # justification is higher than the store and that the voting source is not more than two epochs ago

Reviewer 3: Can you help explain this a bit more? I'm curious about the intuition behind it.

It seems to me that this contradict to the HLMD-GHOST in https://arxiv.org/pdf/2003.03052.pdf
```
L′ ← set of leaf blocks Bl in G such that (Bj , j) ∈ J(ffgview(Bl))
```

            return True
        return False

    current_epoch = compute_epoch_at_slot(get_current_slot(store))
    voting_source = get_voting_source(store, block_root)

>     # The voting source should be at the same height as the store's justified checkpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # The voting source should be at the same height as the store's justified checkpoint
```

    correct_justified = (
        store.justified_checkpoint.epoch == GENESIS_EPOCH

>         or voting_source.epoch == store.justified_checkpoint.epoch

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be a check on checkpoint equivalence rather than than just epoch equivalence?

Once I see checkpoint X, I should only swap to another justified if it is *greater* than the epoch of X.

Author: If there are two conflicting checkpoints at the same height, we want LMD competition to take over. Otherwise, the order in which those conflicting checkpoints are received decides which fork we are on, which can cause deadlocks that require manual recovery.

Reviewer 3: Lemma 4.11 in https://arxiv.org/pdf/2003.03052.pdf said that there will be no two conflicting justified checkpoints at the same epoch?

Author: Yes, that's correct. If we encounter the 1/3-slashable case of two conflicting justified checkpoints at the same height, we want the chain to keep progressing by resolving the tie using LMD competition.

    )

>     # If the block should be pulled-up due to previous epoch being justified, also check

Reviewer 2: I find this comment a bit confusing. How about the following edit?

> If the previous epoch is justified, the block should be pulled-up. In this case, check that unrealized justification is higher than the store and that the voting source is not more than two epochs ago

    # that the unrealized justification is higher than the store's justified
    # checkpoint, and the voting source is not more than two epochs ago.
    if not correct_justified and is_previous_epoch_justified(store):
        correct_justified = (
            store.unrealized_justifications[block_root].epoch >= store.justified_checkpoint.epoch and

>             voting_source.epoch + 2 >= current_epoch

Reviewer 2: Consider adding a comment here.
and/or consider defining a var for  `2` to make this more descriptive

        head = max(children, key=lambda root: (get_weight(store, root), root))
```

#### `update_checkpoints`

```python
def update_checkpoints(store: Store, justified_checkpoint: Checkpoint, finalized_checkpoint: Checkpoint) -> None:
    """
    Update checkpoints in store if necessary
    """
    # Update justified checkpoint

>     if justified_checkpoint.epoch > store.justified_checkpoint.epoch:

Reviewer 2: Sanity check: updating these two independent is safe because in `on_block` and any other entry mechanism, we are pre-filtering by finalized anyway so justified will remain coherent with finality?

Said another way, we would reject blocks from non-finality-coherent chains before we got to this point and thus not get to a place where a higher justified from a non-finalized ancestor would work its way into the store

Author: Yes, that's correct.

    if finalized_checkpoint.epoch > store.finalized_checkpoint.epoch:
        store.finalized_checkpoint = finalized_checkpoint
```

#### `update_unrealized_checkpoints`

```python
def update_unrealized_checkpoints(store: Store, unrealized_justified_checkpoint: Checkpoint,
                                  unrealized_finalized_checkpoint: Checkpoint) -> None:
    """
    Update unrealized checkpoints in store if necessary
    """
    # Update unrealized justified checkpoint
    if unrealized_justified_checkpoint.epoch > store.unrealized_justified_checkpoint.epoch:
        store.unrealized_justified_checkpoint = unrealized_justified_checkpoint

    # Update unrealized finalized checkpoint
    if unrealized_finalized_checkpoint.epoch > store.unrealized_finalized_checkpoint.epoch:
        store.unrealized_finalized_checkpoint = unrealized_finalized_checkpoint
```

#### Pull-up tip helpers

##### `compute_pulled_up_tip`

```python
def compute_pulled_up_tip(store: Store, block_root: Root) -> None:
    state = store.block_states[block_root].copy()
    # Pull up the post-state of the block to the next epoch boundary
    process_justification_and_finalization(state)

>     # Store the unrealized justification.
>     store.unrealized_justifications[block_root] = state.current_justified_checkpoint
> 
>     # Update unrealized checkpoints in store if necessary
>     update_unrealized_checkpoints(store, state.current_justified_checkpoint, state.finalized_checkpoint)

Reviewer 2: These comments seem superfluous 

```suggestion
    store.unrealized_justifications[block_root] = state.current_justified_checkpoint
    update_unrealized_checkpoints(store, state.current_justified_checkpoint, state.finalized_checkpoint)
```

>     # If the block is from a prior epoch, apply the realized values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # If the block is from a prior epoch, apply the realized values
```

    block_epoch = compute_epoch_at_slot(store.blocks[block_root].slot)
    current_epoch = compute_epoch_at_slot(get_current_slot(store))
    if block_epoch < current_epoch:
        update_checkpoints(store, state.current_justified_checkpoint, state.finalized_checkpoint)
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

#### `on_tick` helpers

##### `on_tick_per_slot`

```python
def on_tick_per_slot(store: Store, time: uint64) -> None:
    previous_slot = get_current_slot(store)

>     # update store time

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # Update store time
```

    store.time = time

    current_slot = get_current_slot(store)

>     # Reset store.proposer_boost_root if this is a new slot

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # If this is a new slot, reset store.proposer_boost_root
```

    if current_slot > previous_slot:
        store.proposer_boost_root = Root()

>     # Not a new epoch, return
>     if not (current_slot > previous_slot and compute_slots_since_epoch_start(current_slot) == 0):
>         return
> 
>     # Pull-up justification and finalization from previous epoch
>     update_checkpoints(store, store.unrealized_justified_checkpoint, store.unrealized_finalized_checkpoint)

Reviewer 2: Seems cleaner as an affirmative if and statement (instead of checking the negative and returning)

```suggestion
    # If a new epoch, pull-up justification and finalization from previous epoch
    if  current_slot > previous_slot and compute_slots_since_epoch_start(current_slot) == 0:
        update_checkpoints(store, store.unrealized_justified_checkpoint, store.unrealized_finalized_checkpoint)
```

    # Check that the epoch number and slot number are matching
    assert target.epoch == compute_epoch_at_slot(attestation.data.slot)

>     # Attestations target be for a known block.
>     # If target block is unknown, delay consideration until the block is found.

Reviewer 2: Prefer one line (<= 120 chars)
```suggestion
    # Attestation target must be for a known block. If target block is unknown, delay consideration until block is found
```

##### `update_latest_messages`

```python

> def update_latest_messages(store: Store,

Reviewer 2: This is within line requirements (120). Let's revert to a single line

```python
def on_tick(store: Store, time: uint64) -> None:

>     # If the ``store.time`` falls behind, catch up slot by slot to
>     # ensure that every previous slot will be processed with ``on_tick_per_slot``.

Reviewer 2: I originally read this comment as though the caller needs to be careful to call for each slot, but the function catches up for you. I think the following is a little bit clearer

```suggestion
    # If the ``store.time`` falls behind, while loop catches up slot by slot
    # to ensure that every previous slot is processed with ``on_tick_per_slot``
```

    # Check the block is valid and compute the post-state
    state = pre_state.copy()
    block_root = hash_tree_root(block)
    state_transition(state, signed_block, True)
    # Add new block to the store
    store.blocks[block_root] = block
    # Add new state for this block to the store
    store.block_states[block_root] = state

    # Add proposer score boost if the block is timely
    time_into_slot = (store.time - store.genesis_time) % SECONDS_PER_SLOT
    is_before_attesting_interval = time_into_slot < SECONDS_PER_SLOT // INTERVALS_PER_SLOT
    if get_current_slot(store) == block.slot and is_before_attesting_interval:
        store.proposer_boost_root = hash_tree_root(block)

    # Update checkpoints in store if necessary
    update_checkpoints(store, state.current_justified_checkpoint, state.finalized_checkpoint)

>     # Eagerly compute unrealized justification and finality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # Eagerly compute unrealized justification and finality
```
